Device drivers ported from the Linux kernel

USB
###

Host controller
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The driver will start all USB controller types a platform offers.

Please consult repos/dde_linux/drivers/usb_host/README for a description.

HID
~~~

Please consult repos/dde_linux/drivers/usb_hid/README for a description.

Storage
~~~~~~~

Please consult repos/os/src/drivers/usb_block/README for a description.

Network (Nic)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Please consolut repos/dde_linux/src/drivers/usb_net/README for a description.

LXIP
####

LXIP is a port of the Linux TCP/IP stack to Genode. It is build as a shared
library named 'lxip.lib.so'. The IP stack can be interfaced using Genode's
version of 'libc' by linking your application to 'lxip_libc' plugin in your
'target.mk' file.


lx_kit
######

The modular lx_kit seperates the required back end functionality of the Linux
emulation environment from the front end. Thereby each driver can reuse
specific parts or supply more suitable implementations by itself. It is used to
reduce the amount of redundant code in each driver.

The lx_kit is split into several layers whose structure is as follows:

The first layer in _repos/dde_linux/src/include/lx_emul_ contains those header
files that provide the structural definitions and function declarations of the
Linux API, e.g. _errno.h_ provides all error code values. The second layer in
_repos/dde_linux/src/include/lx_emul/impl_ contains the implementation of
selected functions, e.g. _slab.h_ provides the implementation of 'kmalloc()'.
The lx_kit back end API is the third layer and provides the _Lx::Malloc_
interface (_repos/dde_linux/src/include/lx_kit/malloc.h_) which is used to
implement 'kmalloc()'. There are several generic implementations of the lx_kit
interfaces that can be used by a driver.

A driver typically includes a 'lx_emul/impl/xyz.h' header once directly in its
lx_emul compilation unit. The lx_kit interface files are only included in those
compilation units that use or implement the interface. If a driver wants to use
a generic implementation it must add the source file to its source file list.
The generic implementations are located in _repos/dde_linux/src/lx_kit/_.

The modular lx_kit still depends on the private _lx_emul.h_ header file that is
tailored to each driver. Since the lx_kit already contains much of the
declarations and definitions that were originally placed in these private
header files, those files can now ommit a large amount of code.
